Mikhail Kalinin: Hey, Justin.
Justin Traglia: Good morning.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, good to see you. I was like, wondering if anyone will come.
Justin Traglia: I suspect a few people will come, but who knows?
Justin Traglia: I was thinking, like, the Nimbus people.
Justin Traglia: Thank you, Tom.
Mikhail Kalinin: LLC.
Justin Traglia: I just saw your comment on the, sorry about moving git safe execution block hash to fast confirmation.
Mikhail Kalinin: Oh, yeah, that's fine to move to this topic, yeah. I mean, like, yeah, okay.
Justin Traglia: I think that makes perfect sense. I'm gonna close my PR, and .
Luca Zanolini: governance.
Justin Traglia: some of that.
Justin Traglia: Good luck.
Justin Traglia: It looks fine.
Mikhail Kalinin: I don't know, I can, if you want me to handle it.
Justin Traglia: Sure. I'll just close it and let you handle it. I'll leave a comment here in a minute.
Mikhail Kalinin: Cool Yeah, basically, we didn't have the right place for this function before.
Mikhail Kalinin: Like, I mean, the proper one. It's why we had… Separate,
Mikhail Kalinin: spec document. But now it means… it seems like it's quite…
Mikhail Kalinin: At least, with the recent changes, it's quite attached to
Mikhail Kalinin: Do the false confirmation anyway.
Mikhail Kalinin: So… Yeah, makes sense to move it there.
Justin Traglia: I agree.
Mikhail Kalinin: So we'll just wait.
Mikhail Kalinin: For a few more minutes.
Mikhail Kalinin: And… End story.
Mikhail Kalinin: Hey, Mercy.
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: Hello?
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: Good afternoon.
Mikhail Kalinin: In Azar?
Nazar Hussain: Good morning, good evening, afternoon.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, good time of… Every Wednesday.
Mikhail Kalinin: We'll start in a minute.
Nazar Hussain: Sure.
Mikhail Kalinin: Right, let's get started So…
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, here is the agenda. So, I believe that. Hey, Jihoon.
Mikhail Kalinin: I believe that this, this call is gonna be quite,
Mikhail Kalinin: Sure, and we will start with the client… client updates.
Mikhail Kalinin: So, who wants to go first?
Nazar Hussain: I can start from my side.
Mikhail Kalinin: Please, go ahead.
Nazar Hussain: Yeah, after, merging the… PRR plus X.
Nazar Hussain: there were few tests that were failing, in my implementation, probably last two commits of the PR, which was expecting it, but…
Nazar Hussain: Those are some minor, rounding bugs for the integers, weight calculation, so…
Nazar Hussain: I fixed those, everything is ready. We have deployed them on our infrastructure for testing.
Nazar Hussain: It's been there for more than a week, and things are smooth so far.
Nazar Hussain: And, I'm now getting…
Nazar Hussain: A review from my team members, hopefully, once that is done, within a week more.
Nazar Hussain: we will merge, our PR, then it will be available for everyone to run under the feature flag.
Nazar Hussain: The only observation that I got from
Nazar Hussain: Some code reviews from my team members are…
Nazar Hussain: That we don't have the specs test for the mainnet reset for it.
Nazar Hussain: Which… I understood, like, by design or by limitation of the performance.
Nazar Hussain: But do we have any plan in the future? To have… Mainnet.
Nazar Hussain: Spectache?
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, that's a good question.
Mikhail Kalinin: I haven't thought about it. We have these for… basically for performance reasons, mainly.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, is… is it… Kind of, like, highly desired to have those tests.
Nazar Hussain: It's not highly desired, but it was one of the… observation that Kind of giving the…
Nazar Hussain: improved trust from the team that, okay, we have some specs for the mainnet and which are passing.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, I see.
Nazar Hussain: So maybe if we… for… we can add, let's say.
Nazar Hussain: 20% or 10% of the specs.
Nazar Hussain: Or even less for the mainnet, for some edge cases, which are very vital for the fast transformation.
Nazar Hussain: Maybe that will be enough.
Justin Traglia: I mean, are there.
Mikhail Kalinin: That's true.
Justin Traglia: Does that affect mainnet and not minimal? I mean, are they not the same code paths with different…
Justin Traglia: Configs, presets.
Nazar Hussain: There are but… of… Yup.
Nazar Hussain: We had been testing everything when it comes to the, like, come towards the, like, a…
Nazar Hussain: spec test, we always had something for the minimal and for the minute. So this is the first time we observed a case where we have
Nazar Hussain: Feature spec test, which are only for the minimum.
Nazar Hussain: And my team observation was that, okay, why is it like this, and is there a chance that we can have some maintenance vectors?
Justin Traglia: I wouldn't say this is, like, the first time. I think this is also how we do light client spec tests. Like, many of the…
Justin Traglia: Like, client tests are minimal only.
Justin Traglia: For performance reasons.
Nazar Hussain: Okay, I was not aware of it, then I will check it.
Justin Traglia: Mikael, how slow are they mainnet tests? Do you know if they would be able to complete within 6 hours?
Justin Traglia: Because I… minimal ones take 1 hour.
Mikhail Kalinin: I haven't even tried, honestly.
Mikhail Kalinin: So… and, we also have some folk choice tests that are, For minimal preset only?
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, for the same reason.
Mikhail Kalinin: So… Since these are basically fork choice tests, like, quite similar to…
Justin Traglia: Yeah, my biggest concern is just that it would take too long to generate, because we have a hard limit of 6 hours.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, I see. Yeah, I'll try, yeah, that's a good, that's a good call. I'll try to…
Mikhail Kalinin: To the place to generate some of those, you know, some of the,
Mikhail Kalinin: A subset of those tests to make them
Mikhail Kalinin: work with mainnet Reset as well.
Justin Traglia: One other thing to keep in mind is that we're already pretty close to our limit, for, like, our 90 tests. Like, we're at, like, 5 hours, so if…
Justin Traglia: If doing this pushes it over the limit, that would be a no-go.
Justin Traglia: Unless they were, like, a separate, action, which it could be.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yes. Yeah, that's… that's… that's to be…
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, let's… let's… let's go… let's finish with the client updates. We have a testing stuff and agenda, so we can discuss this more, because I was… yeah, I have some test, inputs as well.
Nazar Hussain: Yep, all content from my side.
Mikhail Kalinin: Cool. Nazar, you mentioned that you spin up a node with this code running?
Mikhail Kalinin: Or did I miss this too?
Nazar Hussain: Yeah, we have more than 5 moors which are running this thing.
Mikhail Kalinin: Oh, that's great. Did you… do you have any metrics? Do you have any metrics or, you know, any measurements that you have?
Mikhail Kalinin: Are doing with your nodes.
Nazar Hussain: Yeah, yeah, we have a couple of metrics, so I will then…
Nazar Hussain: extract everything out. We have different nodes in different configurations. One is running in the mainnet, one is running on something different configurations, so I will put them all together on my PR, so… and then I will share with you guys to look at it.
Mikhail Kalinin: Awesome. That's… that would be, really helpful.
Mikhail Kalinin: Thank you, and congratulations on, yeah, on… Getting quite close to…
Mikhail Kalinin: to releasing this feature. That's great.
Nazar Hussain: Thank you.
Mikhail Kalinin: Any other… yes, sorry?
Mikhail Kalinin: Okay, any other client updates?
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: Yeah, on the grinding side, we have, like, after the specs PR was merged, while running the FCRM factors, I confirmed one of two pre-existing issues, and then…
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: The first one is, our relative epoch helper rejects lookups more than one epoch from the state, so while the spec needs to epoch back for committees, the…
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: Then the second one was, related to unrealized, justified drips on fork chains, so it's still, like, a hypothesis for me, so I'll need to add, reapply the head state fix, and then add some tracing to figure out how, the previous epoch, to confirm which one was actually, like.
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: driving the over-confirmation before touching any code, so once I get that done, I will update my PR and then ask for team reviews. Although, there's kind of, like, delay in terms of reviewing FCR code for grinding, that's… there's some other things on priority list, so…
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: But if someone else, from the specs side can also help review, that would be great.
Mikhail Kalinin: Can you please drop the PR, link to the PR, to the, probably, first confirmation group on Telegram?
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: I don't think I'm on the group.
Mikhail Kalinin: Oh, really? I'll add you… let me know your Telegram handle, just pop it in the message.
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: Okay.
Mikhail Kalinin: I'll add you there.
Mikhail Kalinin: Right, so, you mentioned the case where, the committees are requested from
Mikhail Kalinin: Not from the previous epoch, but from the epoch before the previous one, right?
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: Yeah.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, and this has some difficulties on your end.
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: Yes. I'm trying to figure out how to tackle it, so I…
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: It's… by Friday, I'll probably have something.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, I see. Yeah, it's an edge case,
Mikhail Kalinin: And we have a test for this hatch case, so…
Mikhail Kalinin: Cool, thank you so much for… for your update.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah.
Mikhail Kalinin: So… The other… the other updates, from… from the client side that I'm aware of, he's, okay
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, I'll send you an invite link.
Mikhail Kalinin: to the first confirmation group. So the other updates are, like, the Nimbus has, released this feature…
Mikhail Kalinin: Not… yeah, it's not… it's enabled by default in the release they made, so it's not, like, behind the feature flag.
Mikhail Kalinin: And the issues that they have faced with is basically
Mikhail Kalinin: The issue related to Nethermind, I'll just… Thank you.
Mikhail Kalinin: link you to the PR.
Mikhail Kalinin: So in other mind, there is a problem with the safe head.
Mikhail Kalinin: So the implementation, their implementation is not compatible with the engine API spec.
Mikhail Kalinin: What I dropped in the chat is basically a fix for this issue, Nethermind, but it's not yet released. It has been merged, but there were releases after this PR was merged, but yeah, it's not… this fix is not yet.
Mikhail Kalinin: Released by Nethermind team.
Mikhail Kalinin: So…
Mikhail Kalinin: And then Nimbus basically rolled out another release, where they have basically disabled the FCR. So they have a version with FCR, and they have a version without FCR.
Mikhail Kalinin: And once the… this feature will be, once this bug will be fixed by Nethermind team.
Mikhail Kalinin: Nimbus will… bring the, FCR.
Mikhail Kalinin: Enabled by default, back.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, so that's… that's the story.
Mikhail Kalinin: Of these bugs, so just, you know, it's… yeah, be aware of that issue exists.
Mikhail Kalinin: When you probably run your implementation with Nethermind as EL.
Mikhail Kalinin: Alright, and yeah, hopefully, hopefully, other clients, I haven't heard from… Prysm and lighthouse.
Mikhail Kalinin: Lately, so we'll see.
Mikhail Kalinin: Hope they will just provide some fine updates in the group.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yep.
Mikhail Kalinin: Cool.
Mikhail Kalinin: Anything else on the client side?
Mikhail Kalinin: Otherwise, we will move on to the spec.
Mikhail Kalinin: And testing.
Mikhail Kalinin: All right.
Mikhail Kalinin: Thank you so much, guys, for the client updates.
Mikhail Kalinin: So, this pack… We have this PR merged, the main PR. It's not gGLOSSS compatible.
Mikhail Kalinin: That's one of the things to fix.
Mikhail Kalinin: In the… Short term?
Mikhail Kalinin: And, we also have,
Mikhail Kalinin: Have tests, like the, major…
Mikhail Kalinin: you know, say, core, test ensued, has been also merged, within the spec PR.
Mikhail Kalinin: But there are new tests to come.
Mikhail Kalinin: So my, my current, focus is on the gGLOSSS. So what's, to make the, fast confirmation rule spec.
Mikhail Kalinin: Work with gGLOSSS.
Mikhail Kalinin: I'd like to at least try to do some adjustments in the fork choice.
Mikhail Kalinin: Abstraction layer.
Mikhail Kalinin: To make it easier to work with, like.
Mikhail Kalinin: Basically, that the fast confirmation rule can be
Mikhail Kalinin: can just use the folk choice abstractions, regardless of whether they are from GLOSSS or from Phase 0.
Mikhail Kalinin: So this will be abstracted away by the fork choice specification.
Mikhail Kalinin: I'm currently the work in progress on that, and that's gonna be a big change, and
Mikhail Kalinin: I'm not sure how this change will…
Mikhail Kalinin: play out, because we know that everyone is focused with GLOSS and the ePBS, and having this kind of change is
Mikhail Kalinin: much easier to have it earlier than later, but now we are quite deep into the process. But that's a different stuff. If that will not work, like, these kind of changes will not work, then we will have to make the fast confirmation rule.
Mikhail Kalinin: spec for, basically, fork-aware, which is also doable, but… You know, less pretty.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, also on the testing side.
Mikhail Kalinin: Justin mentioned we have a limit, but we still have some tests to write, some edge case tests, mostly.
Mikhail Kalinin: So we'll see.
Mikhail Kalinin: I'm planning to work on those tests after this pack is completely done.
Mikhail Kalinin: So that's the spec and testing updates.
Mikhail Kalinin: That, we have for today.
Mikhail Kalinin: Any questions?
Justin Traglia: Yeah, I have a few questions. The changes to fork choice, like in gGLOSSS and previous forks, wouldn't actually change behavior, correct? Just, the way things are organized and helpers, and etc.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah.
Justin Traglia: Okay. Yep, that sounds fine to me.
Justin Traglia: If, for whatever reason, it is, like, a really big change, I would suggest splitting it up into multiple PRs. That just makes it a bit faster to get merged.
Mikhail Kalinin: Right.
Justin Traglia: doesn't…
Mikhail Kalinin: Dude.
Justin Traglia: If it doesn't make sense, I understand, so… If only if possible.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, yeah, I see. Yeah, it's… it's gonna be a change, like…
Mikhail Kalinin: We're changing, like, multiple parts of this pack at the same time. It cannot be done.
Mikhail Kalinin: Separate, unfortunately. I mean, like, broken down into separate PRs. And, yeah, there will be updates to tests as well,
Mikhail Kalinin: Like, it's not… Strictly speaking, there are no semantic changes, but there are some
Mikhail Kalinin: Strictly speaking, there are some semantic changes to clause, but they do not affect the behavior, the intended behavior.
Mikhail Kalinin: So, it's just… yeah.
Mikhail Kalinin: I'll try to highlight all those changes in the PR and, you know, do some equivalence comparison.
Mikhail Kalinin: Of what was before and what is after these changes, so to make it easier to reason about.
Mikhail Kalinin: Okay.
Justin Traglia: This sounds good. Looking forward to reviewing it.
Justin Traglia: And as for testing, on the minimal side of things, I think we have a lot of headroom, so…
Justin Traglia: Previously, before FCR tests, it took maybe about 10 to 20 minutes to run everything, and then with the FCR test, it takes about an hour, so you would have an additional 5 hours of testing headroom.
Justin Traglia: But… We do use that for,
Justin Traglia: Like, quick turnaround tests, so it does kind of hurt to have them really long.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, I see. Okay, cool. So…
Mikhail Kalinin: For mainnet tests, we have a little bit of a room, right? So… so we can include some core…
Mikhail Kalinin: more important tests into that. I mean, like, the fast confirmation rule tests.
Justin Traglia: Possibly.
Justin Traglia: Yeah.
Mikhail Kalinin: Okay.
Mikhail Kalinin: Alright, if there are nothing about spec and testing any more today, so…
Mikhail Kalinin: Let's move on to the research updates.
Mikhail Kalinin: Bert, Luca, do you want to…
Mikhail Kalinin: Do you have any updates for today, maybe about the paper, or anything else?
Luca Zanolini: about the paper, not really, in the sense that I think it's,
Luca Zanolini: ready, I suspect. I need to see if there are a couple of feedbacks that are not yet addressed, but other than that, I believe that it can also be
Luca Zanolini: published very, very soon, like in… I don't know if… what Roberto thinks, but…
Luca Zanolini: Should be ready to be published, probably.
Luca Zanolini: I haven't looked at it for next… for the past couple of weeks, because I was focused on something else, but the last time I checked was
Luca Zanolini: kind of ready.
Luca Zanolini: But maybe I missed something, if Roberto has something to add?
Roberto Saltini: No, we just need to go through the latest feedback.
Roberto Saltini: From a guide, actually, so… Yep.
Luca Zanolini: Perfect.
Roberto Saltini: I mean, that is a much, bit of… But not substanti, substantial changes.
Roberto Saltini: So… Yep.
Roberto Saltini: Won't take long.
Mikhail Kalinin: Cool. Thank you, guys. And, kind of… Are there any open questions?
Mikhail Kalinin: Or discussion?
Mikhail Kalinin: Stuff.
Mikhail Kalinin: Alright, so I have one thing, yeah, Mercy, please go ahead.
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: Sorry, I have a question. Is there, like, a plan to have, all the clients I have implemented so far to, like, run them together and then, sort of.
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: Collect data on it to see how it actually performs.
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: Collectively.
Mikhail Kalinin: That's… yeah, that's a good point. We would like to have these, such measurements, and it would be great to standardize
Mikhail Kalinin: metrics, basically.
Mikhail Kalinin: So… We can… Easily compare, you know, the measurement, the performance of the clients.
Mikhail Kalinin: This probably will help us to find some, you know, obvious, bugs, in the implementation, or just, you know.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yep.
Mikhail Kalinin: But, yeah, there is a question with the standardizing metrics.
Mikhail Kalinin: And, we need to do some work in that, but
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, what I want… what else I wa…
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, Marissa, do you have anything else to add on that?
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: I don't know if we already have metrics, something we want to, like, instrument, like.
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: specific things that would help, so that I can also, like, include it on my own,
Mikhail Kalinin: communication.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, so what, I, I probably… yeah, that's a good call, probably it's time for me to create… to at least open up a PR to do the metrics repository with, like, most meaningful FCR metrics.
Mikhail Kalinin: Thanks for bringing this up. What we basically want to measure is, the main metric would be the
Mikhail Kalinin: Delay between the current slots, so the distance between the current slot and the most recent confirmed slots.
Mikhail Kalinin: like, the slot of the most recent confirmed block. That's the main metric.
Mikhail Kalinin: We would like to see. Also, the other ones are kind of… Re… reworks of confirmed block.
Mikhail Kalinin: Maybe restarts… You know?
Mikhail Kalinin: And, yeah.
Mikhail Kalinin: restores, like, I mean.
Mikhail Kalinin: The restart, when we start from the greatest unrealistic point, and, also, maybe…
Mikhail Kalinin: Measure where a confirmation failed or not, something like that.
Mikhail Kalinin: And also, like, how much time, basically, the runtime of the algorithm in milliseconds, something like that.
Mikhail Kalinin: I think all should fit into Grafana metrics.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, and… Right, so…
Mikhail Kalinin: I'll…
Mikhail Kalinin: do this. I'll do this in the next couple of weeks, open the PR with the metrics, so there is an idea of what we want to measure.
Mikhail Kalinin: And share it.
Mikhail Kalinin: on everyone.
Nazar Hussain: The, yeah, the one, the metrics that you just mentioned.
Nazar Hussain: I think these are all covered already by Lodestar.
Nazar Hussain: So you're tracking the fast confound, like, confirmed block slot?
Nazar Hussain: And we already have the finalized slot.
Nazar Hussain: So, we can calculate the distance, in the Grafana dashboard.
Mikhail Kalinin: Awesome. Yeah, that's… that's really great to hear.
Mikhail Kalinin: All right, so…
Mikhail Kalinin: I wanted to share that there is a small Pick an API change, which adds the fast confirmation events to the event stream.
Mikhail Kalinin: it's pretty straightforward, I mean… She just basically has to…
Mikhail Kalinin: Two fields, block and slot, which is…
Mikhail Kalinin: The root and the slot of the most recent confirmed block.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, so this PR has been merged, and, keep this in mind.
Mikhail Kalinin: Maybe… It makes sense to add these from the very beginning, and yeah.
Mikhail Kalinin: Include this into implementation as well.
Mikhail Kalinin: This, this kind of thing is basically,
Mikhail Kalinin: We know that the consumer can basically go to EL and request the most recent confirmed block hash, but
Mikhail Kalinin: Potentially, some consumers, may need… may require the actual beacon block route that is confirmed, not the, execution payload hash.
Mikhail Kalinin: And this will be, like, the source where they could get the… that, we can block route.
Mikhail Kalinin: By basically listening to the event stream.
Mikhail Kalinin: All right, that's… that's it about updates from my side, and one last thing that I have, just to think about how… how…
Mikhail Kalinin: when… when would make sense to have a next call? Is it, like…
Mikhail Kalinin: I think we'll probably have one in a couple of weeks, like, as the…
Mikhail Kalinin: According to the cadence that we had before the interop.
Mikhail Kalinin: But then, let's just, you know, think about how we want to proceed with this breakout room.
Mikhail Kalinin: Okay, and discuss these next time.
Mikhail Kalinin: Alright.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, that's… that'd be great, Jeff.
Mikhail Kalinin: It could be on a dashboard.
Mikhail Kalinin: Right?
Jihoon: You mean, like.
Mikhail Kalinin: Like, you…
Jihoon: carafe band.
Mikhail Kalinin: nops.
Jihoon: Err Yeah, I mean, like, Dora, the Explorer, that we use.
Jihoon: When you run some DevNets, so we can modify that Explorer to show the most confirmed block.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, that'd be great, but,
Mikhail Kalinin: And you will need a client that…
Mikhail Kalinin: the door, I guess, for information from to basically run the fast confirmation rule. Yeah, but that's great.
Jihoon: Yes, yes, exactly, yeah.
Mikhail Kalinin: Alright, cool.
Mikhail Kalinin: Okay, thanks, everyone.
Mikhail Kalinin: And see you in a couple of weeks.
Nazar Hussain: Thank you so much.
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: Thank you.
Jihoon: Thank you.
Roberto Saltini: But… but thanks.